#
Join Combinators

Hello, in the previous video we looked at a utility called "tap". Tap is a combinator that essentially performs a no-op. It creates a function that when applied to some value, applies another function over the value, but then returns the original value untouched, it's performs no operation that effects our composition. It's an acceptable way to introduce side-effects for the purposes of debugging composed functions to see what's going on at any point in the composition.

In this video we're going to look at a couple of other combinators that are more useful for doing actual work:

-- _**Bullet Points**_ --

1. K Combinator, "const" combinator

2. Join Combinators \(S-Combinator\)

3. Composition logic that isn't so linear

4. Using combinators to write another Tap-combinator

-- _**Narration**_ --

1. The K combinator, it's the "const" combinator, it creates functions that behave as constants, always returning the same value. So this guy will look familiar from the last video a bit. It sounds a bit like tap, but it's not tap.

2. We'll look at some joining combinators. One being another well known combinator called the S-Combinator. I say "well known", but "less disputed" might be more accurate. If you had a dinner party for all your combinator-using acquaintances, the "S-combinator", "K-combinator" and "I-combinator" would be the three that everybody knew and agreed on their form.

3. We'll write some composition logic that depends on these "join combinators". We will find ourselves often running into situations where we might end up writing custom combinators to fulfill some pattern of operations not possible through simple composition.

4. ~~Combinators are good at combining logic though of coarse... so we can actually use the S-Combinator and the K-Combinator to re-create the "tap function" from the previous video very easily if we wanted. And so we will at the end of this video.~~

## Main Video

```js
const K = (x) => (y) => x
```

Here is the "K-Combinator", this one is simple too, but maybe not at first glance. The K-Combinator is also called the "const" combinator, ka-ka-konst...

```js
const always = K
always([1, 4])
```

We mentioned K in the last video, we just didn't see it in action. Basically "K" creates a function that just returns a value, and that's it. It's the const keyword in a functional world without the const keyword. The "const" combinator works in a similar way to the "const" keyword as well.

```
const ten = K(10)
log( ten() )

const oneTwo = K([1, 2])

const nums = oneTwo()
nums.push(3)
log(oneTwo())
```

The const keyword makes variables, the K-combinator is a function however, so we have to call it. Notice here that just like the const keyword, the K combinator is a strange actor when it comes to composite types. Here we are pushing the value 3 onto the "nums" array. Now whenever we call "one two" again, we are going to get back that same array, meaning the array with values \[1, 2, 3\] in it, not an array with only values 1 and 2

```javascript
const R = require('ramda')
const getData = require('../data/users')
```

In this video we are going to work with an array of user data, it's included in the github repo in the file `'/app/data/users.js'`

```javascript
const I = (x) => x
```

We'll start by writing the combinators that we have learned so far, a couple of these I've shown you under different names. We have the "I-Combinator", that is "identity", in Ramda if you wanted to pull the I-combinator out of thin air you could use `R.identity`.

```javascript
const I = (x) => x
const K = (x) => (y) => x
```

Then we have the "K-Combinator", it makes the const function, in Ramda this would be `R.always`.

```javascript
const I = (x) => x
const K = (x) => (y) => x
const C = (f) => (a) => (b) => f(b)(a)
```

Next I'm writing the C-combinator, which looks like it's taking 3 arguments, and it does, but you should think of it as just taking one argument, a function, then it returns that same function with the first two arguments "flipped", we've seen that before as the Ramda function `R.flip` and also in volume one we created a flip utility.

```javascript
const I = (x) => x
const K = (x) => (y) => x
const C = (f) => (a) => (b) => f(b)(a)
const B = (f) => (g) => (x) => f(g(x))
```

The last one we'll write is the "B-Combinator", we know this by another name as well, it's the compose combinator. The B-Combinator doesn't do awesome composition of any amount of functions like our implementation, it's like the version we first met in section one. That's ok, maybe it has some uses for us.

```javascript
// main :: String -> String
const main = compose(userGreeting, getUserById)
```

Let's write a function that takes a list of users, or actually we'll write it to take a userId, then it will search for that user in our users list and return a friendly greeting. So this is going to take a user id, and then find the user object and pass it into "user greeting". We'll just implement those two functions as the I-Combinator for now

```javascript
// userGreeting
const userGreeting = I
// getUserById
const getUserById = I
// main :: String -> String
const main = compose(userGreeting, getUserById)
```

So all this will do for now is just take a string and return a string. Which is what we actually want, but right now it will just return the same string we pass in, which isn't what we want. So the first move will be to implement the "get user by id" function. Some of this will seem like craziness if we're new to point-free functions, so let's write them with points \(meaning explicit params\), just to get things rolling a bit.

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head()
```

So then: In this function we know that we are getting passed an id, the user id to lookup. We also know that we are going to be filtering an array from many users to an array with one user, then we'll want to take the first element of that array, so we'll be calling "head" to get the first item of that final array

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head(
R.filter((user) => R.prop('id', user) === id)
)
```

This is our filter function, it will take a "user object", then we want to check if the id property of that user is equal to the id number passed into the `getUserById` function.

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head(
R.filter((user) => R.prop('id', user) === id)(getData())
)
```

Then we just need to pass all the user objects as the last parameter to the filter function and we should be good to execute this. Let's use the `console.clog` function we wrote in the last video to see what is coming into and going out of our composition.

```javascript
const main = compose.clog(I, getUserById)
main('59110bb4cadc8b7a57df9071')
```

Awesome! We're getting a single user object back, In our console we see that we're getting an "id", that's the initial input, then we're getting a user object logged 2 times, that's because the `userGreeting` function is just the "I-Combinator" so we end up getting a log of the user going into and out of that function.

```javascript
// predicate :: String -> Object -> Bool
const predicate = (id) => (user) => R.prop('id', user) === id
// getUserById :: Int -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head(R.filter(predicate(id))(getData()))
```

The first thing that we can do is get that predicate out of there. It has a dependency of the id string, so we'll have to be able to pass the id into the predicate function. So remember in the previous section, I had mentioned that we could refactor a composition if the input was at the far right of nested function calls. We don't yet meet that requirement because the input point to our "get user by id" function is the ID String, but `getData` is called before id is ever used.

```javascript
// data :: [User]
const data = getData()
// predicate :: String -> Object -> Bool
const predicate = (id) => (user) => R.prop('id', user) === id
```

Let's abstract the call to data out, it's a bit confusing with all these parenthesis.

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head(R.filter(predicate(id))(data))
```

If we can get "id" to the far right side we'll be in better shape to refactor this into composition. Right now, I don't need to know what any of these functions do, it helps a lot if I do, but I'm not refactoring these based on what they do, but more so on how they are being structured. So the result of the filter function applied to the predicate function applied to the input string "id" is then called with the input array data.

```javascript
const T = (x) => (f) => f(x)
T(data)(console.log) // eq to console.log(data)
```

There is a combinator called Thrush that will call a function with an input, but we can pass the input in first. Note that Ramda has a function called "T" that is not the same as our "T-Combinator", the Ramda T is a function that always returns true, so it's the "K-Combinator" used with true.

```javascript
// ------ Maybe show this as a slide ------- //
// Here is our T-Combinator (thrush)
const T = (x) => (f) => f(x)
// Here is Ramda's T function
const T = R.always(true) // or
const T = K(true)
// ------ Maybe show this as a slide ------- //
```

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = (id) => R.head(T(data)(R.filter(predicate(id))))
```

We can use the "T-combinator" thrush, to move the input to the left of the function it is passed into

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = R.compose(R.head, T(data), R.filter, predicate)
```

From there it's a simple matter of adding compose to the start and cleaning up the parenthesis, removing the point, that's the parameter, get that out of there, we don't need it anymore. Now this looks a lot cleaner too.

But how the heck are there two inputs into the predicate function there? See how the "id" string is passed into the predicate function, then it returns a function that takes a user object which returns true if that user matches that id. That returned function is the actual predicate used in the filter function, tha t makes sense, but how can we use that in a composition if it requires 2 arguments? It takes 1 argument and returns a function, that function is passed into filter which creates a complete filter function. Then here is the magic, that is passed to Thrush, the T-Combinator, and the T-Combinator has our data and when the filter function is passed into Thrush, it applies the data to the complete filter function, filtering us down to a single user object.

```javascript
// --- Show this as a slide --- //
const threeRingSentence = (a) => (b) => (c) => `${ a } ${ b } ${ c }`
R.compose.clog(T('friend'), T('there'), T('hello'))(threeRingSentence)
// --- Show this as a slide --- //
```

Imagine we have a curried function that takes 3 arguments. Using Thrush we could run that function through a composition passing arguments into it one by one .

```javascript
// --- Show this as a slide --- //
const threeRingSentence = R.curry((a, b, c) => `${ a } ${ b } ${ c }`)
R.compose.clog(T('friend'), T('there'), T('hello'))(threeRingSentence)
// --- Show this as a slide --- //
```

Imagine we have a curried function that takes 3 arguments. Using Thrush we could pass the function `threeRingSentence` into our composition and instead of applying the string "hello" over `threeRingSentence` which would be an error, we can't call a "string" with a function... it will call `threeRingSentence` with the string "hello", it then becomes another function because `threeRingSentence` is curried, again, instead of calling the string "there" with the function returned from the last operation, we call that function with the string "there", so Thrush simply reverses the way we call functions.

```javascript
const D = f => x => g => y => f(x)(g(y))
const S = f => g => x => f(x)(g(x))
```

Let's look at two combinators that can be used to join logic together. There is the D-Combinator, this takes a function, an input, another function, another input. The first function needs to be curried so that when it's called with the first input it creates another function which is then called with results of the call to the second function and input. f of x is applied over g of y.

```javascript
const predicate = (id) => (user) => R.equals (id)(R.prop('id', user))
const predicate = (id) => (user) => D(R.equals)(id)(R.prop('id'))(user)
```

This refactors into the D-Combinator well, except we have one major issue here... we can't go point-free yet because we need to first get id and then user to the outside. "user" is on the outside already, so we really just need to move "id" to where the call to `R.prop('id')` is, switch them around. We need to do it without breaking everything though.

```javascript
const predicate = id => user => D(R.equals)(id)(R.prop('id'))(user)
const predicate = id => user => C(D(R.equals))(R.prop('id'))(id)(user)
const predicate = id => C(D(R.equals))(R.prop('id'))(id)
///--> CANT ERASE LINE!!
```

So first we need to move where we pass the "id" value in. We can use "flip", that will allow us to switch around "id" and "prop\('id'\)", now we can drop user and it's parameter since it's the leaf-most argument you might say. Now ID is the last input so we can drop that as well. And we are point-free!

```javascript
const predicate = R.propEq('id')
```

Now your going to hate me, we could have just used the Ramda function "propEq" it does the same exact thing. Common patterns are going to already be implemented. You're lucky though, because I could have gone the complete other way with it and done this:

```javascript
const predicate = (S(S(K(S(K(S))(K)))(S))(K(K)))(S(K(S(K(S))(K)))(R.equals))(R.prop('id'))
```

That actually will work, and I suggest you never ever write code like this, unless your very very bored. Every single combinator that we've learned can be implemented using the "S-Combinator" and the "K-Combinator", but I don't think I should have to explain why this is bad new bears for any code you plan to share or ever refactor. Let's stick with the ramda propEq function

```javascript
// getUserById :: Str -> User
const getUserById = R.compose(R.head, T(data), R.filter, R.propEq('id'))
```

the propEq takes a prop key, then it takes a value, which is the value of "id" that is composed in, then it is a predicate that takes an object and returns a boolean, this will be called many times, once by each user object to filter down our list of user objects to only the ones that match the ID that we passed in.

```javascript
// userGreeting :: User -> Str
const userGreeting = (user) =
```

Now we just need to make the user greeting function. It's going to be passed the user object that we pulled out of the filtered user list. The input is one user, and the output should be a string that greets them, so maybe it should say "Greetings, &lt;user.name.first&gt; &lt;user.name.last&gt;".

```javascript
// userGreeting :: User -> Str
const userGreeting = (user) => R.concat('Greetings, ')(R.concat(user.name.first)(R.concat(' ', user.name.last)))
```

How to refactor this then? Well, one thing off the bat is that we could take out the \`R.concat\('Greetings, '\) function, because we see how we're applying that to the second half of this line?

```javascript
// greeting :: String -> String
const greeting = R.concat('Greetings, ')
// userGreeting :: User -> Str
const userGreeting = (user) => greeting((R.concat(user.name.first)(R.concat(' ', user.name.last))))
const userGreeting = (user) => R.concat('Greetings, ')(R.concat(user.name.first)(R.concat(' ', user.name.last)))
```

That tells us we can probably use it on the left side of a compose, so for now let's just pull it out. We know the signature will be the signature for a partial concat function.

```javascript
// greeting :: String -> String
const greeting = R.concat('Greetings, ')
// nameArr :: Obj -> Array
const nameArr = n => [R.prop('first', n), R.prop('last', n)]

// main :: String -> String
const userGreeting = compose(greeting, R.join(' '), nameArr, R.prop('name'))
```

If we put the first and last name into an array, then we can join that array with a space character using join, first we'll take the name property out of the user, so we'll take the user object, get the name property, which is an object, we'll compose that into a new function "name array" that builds an array from the name object, then that is joined together with a space in the middle and finally passed into the `greetings` function which we know will just concatenate the string, "Greetings" before the users name. And that's BINGO! Oh wait, sorry, that's B.I.N.G., we're missing the O, we have a point on the name array function. This can be a job for the S-Combinator... or as I personally think of it as a way to remember, "split combo-nah-tah"

```javascript
const nameArr = x => R.prepend(R.prop('first')(x)) (B(Array)(R.prop('last'))(x))
```

First we refactor this so that it is using the prepend function, which adds an element to an array, first prepend takes the element and then it takes the array. So our element is the users first name, the array is an array with the users last name. We are getting the first and last names from using the prop function

```javascript
R.prepend('firstyMcFirstName')(['lasterson'])
```

Essentially the call reduces down to this when the users full name is firstyMcFirstName lasterson. The B-Combinator is compose, I just didn't want to write out compose. So it is composing the functions Array and R.prop\('last'\) to get the last name and then put it in an array.

```javascript
// B(R.prepend)(R.prop('first')) , (B(Array)(R.prop('last')))

const nameArr = S(B(R.prepend)(R.prop('first')) , (B(Array)(R.prop('last'))))
```

We can reduce this to two functions that both take the same argument, the argument being the users name object. So the two functions that take the users name object as an argument are the composition of R.prepend and prop\('first'\) and the second function is the composition of Array and prop\('last'\). We use those as two arguments to the S combinator. Please note, I curried the S-Combinator with Ramda, so we can pass one or two args at a time, if we didn't use ramdas curry then we couldn't split these up with a comma in the middle, we'd need to wrap each side with parenthesis.

So there we have it. Ramda has a converge function which is similar to the S combinator, but it uses an array of functions as the functions to pass the input to and if we used the Ramda converge, we could converge the two functions into compose. Let's not hurt our heads too much, that was an aweful lot to take in. If you have to re-watch this video, maybe try out the refactors yourself, then your doing great, this is tough material, you should need to try it out for yourself.... and if you can understand that perfectly fine, I think we should switch places. You can have my job, and I'll let you teach me.

